---
layout: post
title:  Why to Build a Data Integration Platform?
description: Why to build a data integration platform? You may already have platforms for processing analytical and reporting data, and IPaaS solutions exist as well, This is a series about the leassons learned from building and adopting state-of-the-art streaming data integration platform.
date:   2023-08-11 18:48:00 +0300
image:  '/images/12.jpg'
tags:   #[datahub, data-integration, data-integration-platform, architecture, integration]
---
This post is first part in a series about building and adopting a modern streaming 
data integration platform. Here we discuss the motivation for building your own, instead
of using existing solutions.

Larger enterprises often have a complex system-of-systems. Typically there are
modern systems, based on microservice architectures, perhaps running in public
or private cloud. There may be older systems that are probably monolithic. Some of them
may still be running on mainframe. There are often commercial off-the-shelf
(COTS) products. And so on.

Often we need to use the data from these systems in other systems. Reporting and analysis need
data, and for this we often employ analytical databases.  More recently, data 
clouds, such as Snowflake, have emerged to fill this need. These analytical databases often
have licensing and performance characteristics that make them unsuitable for operative
application use.

Data may be needed in operative applications as well. For example, we might
want to show the data to employees, customers, and business partners. The freshness 
requirements in operative applications may be different from
what is needed in reports or analysis. This also limits reusing the analytical data
integrations for operative applications.

You also need to understand whether your data is "tall" or "wide". 
If your data is "tall", you operate with a fewer kinds of entities, but you have 
more of them. For example, technology-oriented companies often have "tall" data.
Enterprises, on the other hand, more often have "wide" data. When data is "wide"
where there are more different kinds of entities, but number of each kind of entity 
is smaller.

This has multiple consequences on the data integration architectures. For
example, if the operative data needs are "wide", and applications are build
using point-to-point integratins, the number of dependencies between systems increases
more quickly. This may create a combinatorial explosion in the dependency graph,
creating a maintenance nightmare. In such case, pure microservice
architecture (with very small services) may also become less attractive or even 
unsustainable.

One approach is to use backend systems directly, through APIs. This has the
benefit that the data is always fresh, and changes may be easily supported as
well. However, the availability and performance characteristics of backend
systems might not match the requirements of the end user facing applications.

If your data is "wide", even your landing page may need to fetch data from tens of 
systems, making your application take perhaps tens of seconds for initial page load. This is
probably too much for your end users.

If you use data sources directly, you also increases system interdependency. If
you have lots of legacy backend systems, every time you use an interface of
legacy system in a new application, you make it more difficult to replace the
legacy system later.

You may alleviate this issue by creating an interface layer in front 
of the legacy system. This is sometimes called the strangler pattern. But unless you put effort 
to design this interface properly, the issue is really not solved. There is just an
intermediate interface with it's own format, that needs to be deprecated later.

Commercial integration platforms, sometimes called Hybrid Integration Platforms (HIP) offer
some help. Integration Platform as a Service (IPaaS) are also becoming more popular. Many of 
the HIPs have evolved from Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) products. They are useful in 
various scenarios, such as when you need data from a system that has a existing connector. 
The main selling point of these integration platforms is that they can reduce the 
implementation costs.

Big part of integration costs are typically not the integration implementation
itself, but everything else. For example getting to know what data you need,
finding which systems contain the data, negotiating the explicit (or implicit)
data model with various parties, specifying data formats etc.

What integration platform vendors typically do not emphasize is that the integration 
platforms will not help you with the expensive part of building integrations. The 
anticipated cost savings might not really materialize.

There are some hidden long-term costs related to integration platforms as well.
The important one is employee satisfaction.  Many senior developers dislike
integration platforms, as they smell like the ESBs that never really took off.

One reason why senior developers dislike these platforms is that they typically
have their own language for defining mappings between systems and data formats,
with more limited expressive power than full-blown programming languages, such
as Java. Having an additional platform also increases the complexity, by adding
more layers and components. Typically there is also a performance penalty in using 
integration platforms.

The management typically likes the idea of integration platforms more, because the selling
point is that integration work can be delegated to more junior developers. However, the
important and most laborous part of the integration work is the specification. 
That probably needs senior developers to do well.

The integration platforms typically offer the most help with the simpler problems related to
integration. The more complex problems related to integration might not be supported. For
example masking persistent error situations when source or target systems are down, 
providing more reliable and performant access to data than source systems can
support, helping with data reconciliation, ensuring data integrity over multiple systems etc.

In our analysis of existing integration platforms, we could not find one that would have
helped us to provide sufficiently reliable, performant and consistent access to data for 
operative applications.

---

If you need consulting related to system architectures in general, or data integrations in 
particular, please do not hesitate to contact Mikko Ahonen through the contact page.
